Initial PR for Docker Masterclass (#1)
balena-io/docker-masterclass: README.md

    - [2. Installing Docker](#2-installing-docker)
    - [3. The `docker` Command Line Interface](#3-the-docker-command-line-interface)
    - [4. Introduction to Dockerfiles](#4-introduction-to-dockerfiles)
      - [4.1 `FROM` Directive](#41-from-directive)
      - [4.2 `COPY` Directive](#42-copy-directive)
      - [4.3 `RUN` Directive](#43-run-directive)
      - [4.4 `CMD` Directive](#44-cmd-directive)
    - [5. Building a Docker Image](#5-building-a-docker-image)
      - [5.1 `WORKDIR` Directive](#51-workdir-directive)
    - [6. Running a Docker Container](#6-running-a-docker-container)
      - [6.1 EXPOSE Directive](#61-expose-directive)
      - [6.2 Container Instances](#62-container-instances)
    - [7. Tags and Caching in Docker Builds](#7-tags-and-caching-in-docker-builds)
      - [7.1 Tagging Images](#71-tagging-images)
      - [7.2 Build Caching](#72-build-caching)
    - [8. Volumes and Bind Mounts](#8-volumes-and-bind-mounts)
  - [Conclusion](#conclusion)
  - [References](#references)

## Introduction

Docker is a set of services that use OS level virtualization to run
self-contained instances of software. These instances are known as containers,

> and include everything that the software running within them needs to function.

Reviewer: minus the kernel

Author: Done

# Docker Masterclass

* **Masterclass Type:** Core
* **Maximum Expected Time To Complete:** 2 hours

## Table of Contents

> - [Docker Masterclass](#docker-masterclass)

Reviewer 2: Optional but you could probably save a layer of indentation by only including h2 and above headings

Author: I'm actually using a plugin for this, I'll see if it's configurable.

Reviewer 2: If using markdown all in one then see `Markdown › Extension › Toc: Levels` and set e.g. `2..5`

Author: Done.

      - [8.3 Interactive Mode](#83-interactive-mode)
        - [8.3.1 Via `docker run`](#831-via-docker-run)
        - [8.3.2 Via `docker exec`](#832-via-docker-exec)
    - [9. Bind Mounts and Volumes](#9-bind-mounts-and-volumes)
      - [9.1 Bind Mounts](#91-bind-mounts)
      - [9.2 Volumes](#92-volumes)
    - [10. Container Privileges and Permissions](#10-container-privileges-and-permissions)
      - [10.1 Users in Containers](#101-users-in-containers)
      - [10.2 Namespaces, Capabilities, Networking and Control Groups](#102-namespaces-capabilities-networking-and-control-groups)
  - [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Introduction

Docker is a set of services that use OS level virtualization to run
self-contained instances of software. These instances are known as containers,
and include everything that the software running within them needs to function.

This Masterclass is an aside to the rest of the balena Masterclasses, in that
it focuses specifically on Docker, from the basics to some 'deep dives' into
how containers (and other components) function and are constructed.

It is anticipated that after reading the basic sections of this Masterclass,

> the reading of the [Services Masterclass] will allow anybody to develop

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the reading of the [Services Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io/services-masterclass) will allow anybody to develop
```

balena applications and services.

## Hardware and Software Requirements

It is assumed that the reader has access to the following:

* A locally cloned copy of this repository
	[Docker Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io/docker-masterclass).
	Either:
  * `git clone https://github.com/balena-io/docker-masterclass.git`
  * Download ZIP file (from 'Clone or download'->'Download ZIP') and then unzip it to a suitable directory
* A suitable text editor for developing code on your development platform (eg.
    [Visual Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/))
* A suitable shell environment for command execution (such as `bash`)
* A local installation of [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/v17.09/engine/installation/)
	as well as a familiarity with [Dockerfiles](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/)

## Exercises

> All of the following exercises assume that you are running the balena CLI from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the following exercises assume that you are running the Docker CLI from
```

  GitCommit:        b34a5c8af56e510852c35414db4c1f4fa6172339
 runc:
  Version:          1.0.0-rc8+dev
  GitCommit:        3e425f80a8c931f88e6d94a8c831b9d5aa481657
 docker-init:
  Version:          0.18.0
  GitCommit:        fec3683
```

### 1. Introduction to Docker

Docker allows the execution of software in self-enclosed packages called
'containers'. Containers are essentially small execution environments, and
can range from being tiny environments where only a few binaries are included,
to fully blown Linux distributions such as Debian or Ubuntu where many packages
can be included for the service to use (eg. via the use of `apt-get`).

As such, Docker features some very useful benefits:
* The ability to run applications/binaries in a sandboxed execution environment
    where any malicious code will not have access to the host OS.
* Easy and rapid deployment to a machine that Docker is installed on, with the
    assurance that the containers will run in the same way as on any other
    system with Docker installed.
* Rapid development due to the quick building and recreation of containers, as
    opposed to having to reinstall an OS and dependencies on a bare-metal or

>     Viritualised system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Virtualized system.
```

Author: Done

> Containerisation is an alternative form of providing host OS separation to that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Containerization is an alternative form of providing host OS separation to that
```

Reviewer: et al

> of an execution environment, where other forms include Virtualisation, where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of an execution environment, where other forms include Virtualization, where
```

Reviewer: et al

machine resources (such as CPU cores, memory and disk space) are partitioned
off from the host OS and used to run a guest OS instead. Unlike Virtualisation,
Containerisation uses host OS resources as it needs them at runtime. As such,
there is no need to pre-allocate resources.

Docker runs as a service on a machine, and depending on the host OS, how this
occurs varies:
* Linux - Runs as an OS daemon service (such as a `systemd` unit

>    file), which is then sent command via the `docker` and `docker-compose` clients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   file), which is then sent commands via the `docker` and `docker-compose` clients.
```

* macOS - A Xen Hypervisor Virtual Machine runs the Docker service, and a UI
  and CLI client connects to it.

> * Windows - A VM (called MobyVM) runs, with the UI and CLI client connecting to

Reviewer 2: Also now WSL? https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-windows/wsl-tech-preview/

  * it.

At this point, it's worth introducing such terminology, so that we can easily
refer to concepts in the future. It's worth noting that some of the concepts
described in the terminology will be described later in the exercises.

* Layers - A layer is part of a Docker Image or Container. It represents a
  file system layout, comprised of both directories and files. Layers are
  created during the building of a Docker image, or whilst a container is
  currently running.

> * Image - A Docker image is self-contained object representing a file system,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Image - A Docker image is a self-contained object representing a file system,
```

  comprised of Docker layers. The number of layers in an image vary from 1 - n,
  with 'n' being resource-bound. Images are created from Dockerfiles, which
  contain a number of directives that allow the image to be created by carrying
  out operations such as copying files into it, executing commands to configure
  the image (such as `apt-get` from a Debian base image, or running bash scripts
  to generate configuration files) and determining which binary will be executed
  when the image is run as a container.
* Container - A Docker container is a running instance of an image. When an
  image is selected to be run, a new container is created that uses the layers
  from the Docker image as the base filesystem (the image acts as a 'template'
  for the container and the container never alters the image), and then runs any
  command that has been given. Should the container create any new files, or
  update any files that existed in the Docker image *that is not located in a
  bound volume*, a new layer that is owned specifically by that instance of the
  container is created. Container layers persist for the duration of the
  container's life, but are removed on container removal.

> * Volume - A volume is persisent storage that exists as a directory structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Volume - A volume is persistent storage that exists as a directory structure
```

  a named volume (a Docker managed directory on the host OS) into a specific
  location in the container (for example using a volume called `shared-volume`
  into `/usr/share` in the container).
* Network - A Docker network is functionality to connect running containers
  to each other and/or other network interfaces running on the host OS.
  These can vary from simply using the host OS's networking interfaces, to
  user-defined networking bridges which are only used by particular containers.
  All containers that require incoming/outgoing network traffic require a
  Docker network of some description.
* Repository - A Docker repository is storage for Docker images. When a Docker
  image is built, it is stored in the local Docker repository. However, usually
  you'll want to store the image in a location where other users can retrieve
  it. Docker repositories can be private (so that only users with login
  credentials can retrieve images from them), public (so that any user may
  retrieve an image from them) or a mixture of both. The Docker CLI includes
  commands that allow you to pull/push images from/to repositories.

### 2. Installing Docker

> How you install Docker onto your local host OS is dependant on the OS itself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How you install Docker onto your local host OS is dependent on the OS itself
```

and the distribution that you're running. Docker has a set of pages available
that allow the user to easily carry this out
[here](https://docs.docker.com/install/).

An important note here. When installing Docker under Linux, the Docker daemon

> (usually, unless changed) runs as `root`. As such, you'll need to follow the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(usually, unless changed) runs as `root`. As such, you'll need to follow the instructions
```

  start       Start one or more stopped containers
  stats       Display a live stream of container(s) resource usage statistics
  stop        Stop one or more running containers
  tag         Create a tag TARGET_IMAGE that refers to SOURCE_IMAGE
  top         Display the running processes of a container
  unpause     Unpause all processes within one or more containers
  update      Update configuration of one or more containers
  version     Show the Docker version information
  wait        Block until one or more containers stop, then print their exit codes

Run 'docker COMMAND --help' for more information on a command.
```

### 4. Introduction to Dockerfiles

The basis of any Docker image is the Dockerfile. This is a list of instructions
that form a recipe for an image. When an image is built, Docker steps through
the instructions in the Dockerfile and carries out the directive at each step.
Directives are keywords which (usually) form the start of a new line in the
Dockerfile.

As mentioned, Dockerfiles are laid out as a series of directives, which are
executed in series. Here's a very basic example:
```dockerfile
FROM debian:buster

> COPY helloworld /usr/sbin/helloworld

Reviewer: ooc, why `/usr/sbin` here (rather than something like `/usr/src`)?

Author: Because I'm dumb. Fixed.

Reviewer: If GH can be trusted, there's another `/usr/sbin` on line 314 here.

Reviewer 2: Did you miss one in the COPY line here as updated only CMD?

Further directives in the file can carry out operations on the inherited
filesystem, as well as creating new layers which include new or modified
directories and files. Every time the filesystem is modified in any way in the
Dockerfile, a new layer is created. This usually occurs after each full
directive.

As well as inheriting from base images, it's also possible to start a completely
new Docker image which does not include any layers. This can be achieved by
using the special image name `scratch`. This tells Docker it should try to
inherit from any other image, but start a brand new set of layers. In fact, this
is how a large number of 'standard' base images start, such as the Docker
versions of Linux distributions work, by starting from `scratch` and copying in
all of the files that build up that version of Linux.

#### 4.2 [`COPY`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#copy) Directive

So now we now how to use a base image to start with a filesystem in our own
image, but how do we get new files into it?

This is where the `COPY` directive comes in. This allows the copying of files
from the host's local filesystem into the Docker image being built. It's fairly

> similar to the standard copying commands under most OS variants these days in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
similar to the standard copying commands under most OS variants in
```

that it takes the location of a source file or directory on the host and a
destination where the contents of the source should be copied inside the image.
`COPY` preserves all flags on the file when copied, so for example if you copy
a shell script that has the execution flag set, this will be preserved when
copied into the image.

**NOTE:** The directory location of the Dockerfile being used to build the image
    the image is known as the build context. Any files in the build context, or
    any of it's sub-directory hierarchy is also part of the build context.
    This can be changed by other commands, but this is the default and we'll be
    using it for the moment.

> The following will recursively copy the contents of the  `directory-3` directory

Reviewer 2: Not sure about this sentence, maybe just needs some punctuation? 

The following will recursively copy the contents of the  `directory-3` directory, the current build context, into the image at the location `/directory-3`?

Author: I'd missed an `in`

the current build context into the image at the location `/directory-3`:
```
COPY directory-3 /directory-3/
```
Note that you need to add the trailing `/` to the destination directory. If
the destination directory doesn't already exist, it'll be dynamically created
(which means you can specify a nested destination directory without having to
run `mkdir` in the image).

Wildcards also work, so that the following:
```
COPY * /all-the-files/
```
Will recursively copy *everything* (including the Dockerfile) in the current
build context to the `/all-the-files/` directory in the built image.

It should be noted that the source of files are *always* relative to the build
context. Therefore files must be available to that context (you can't, for
example, reference files that are in the directory above where the Dockerfile
is, because it's not within the same context).

> `COPY` has a few switches to, that include abilities to set ownership and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`COPY` has a few switches that include abilities to set ownership
```

> on files as they're copied. Refer to the Dockerfile documentation for more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on files as they're copied. Refer to the [Dockerfile documentation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#copy) for more
```

Author: Hmm, I'd actually put a hyperlink in the COPY at the top. Do you think it's worth duplicating (I don't want to end up putting hyperlinks everywhere, esp. if they get out of date).

Reviewer 2: I tend to err on the side of adding a hyperlink for any text that is explicitly referencing something such as this. In this case, though I think the odds on that one getting broken would be slim, and trivial to resolve, if worried about duplicates you can always use reference links such that the link is only included once i.e.

```
Refer to the [Dockerfile documentation][docker-copy-ref] for more

[docker-copy-ref]: https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#copy
```

Then you get into mixing inline and reference links so 🤷‍♂

`list-files.sh` in the current build context that was simply:
```
#!/bin/bash
ls -l /
```
We could copy this into the Docker image during the build and then run it:
```
COPY list-files.sh /list-files.sh

RUN /list-files.sh > /files.txt \
    && cat /files.txt
```
This would copy the script into the image at location `/list-files.sh`, and
then run that script to get a list of all the entries in the root directory to
a file and then outputing the contents to the build.

#### 4.4 [`CMD`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#cmd) Directive

The `CMD` directive is usually the last directive in a Dockerfile. This informs
Docker what should be run when a container instance is created from an image.

This tends to be a call to a single binary, or script. Once the call has
finished, the container will exit. Because most Docker images are designed
around services or daemons (for example a web server or similar), it's unusual
for a `CMD` to not start up a daemon or script that restarts should that service
exit. But this doesn't mean it has to be like that.

Taking the example from the `RUN` directive explanation, the following will set

> the entrance command to list the entries in the root of the filing system:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the entrance command to list the entries in the root of the file system:
```

As such, you should always use the 'exec' form unless there are very good
reasons for not doing so.

As the `CMD` directive informs Docker of what to run when a container is
started, there should only ever be *one* `CMD` directive in a Dockerfile. If
more than one exist, only the *last* `CMD` directive seen will be run. Sometimes
this can be useful, if you want to use a base image which usually runs as a
service, but wish to override the `CMD` directive from that base image (perhaps
you want to run with different parameters, or use the base image because of the
filesystem layers it includes).

The `CMD` directive can also be used in conjunction with the `ENTRYPOINT`
directive, which we'll describe in a more advanced Docker Masterclass.

### 5. Building a Docker Image

Now that we know some of the basic Dockerfile directives, it's worth learning
how to put some of these together to build a simple Docker image.

For convenience, export a variable to point to the root of this masterclass
repository, as we'll use this for the rest of the exercises, e.g.:
```
$ export BALENA_DOCKER_MASTERCLASS=~/docker-masterclass
```

> Now change directory to the single-service-app directory in the root of this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now change directory to the simple-docker-app directory in the root of this
```

masterclass repository, e.g.:
```
$ cd $BALENA_DOCKER_MASTERCLASS/simple-docker-app
```
Note that for the rest of these exercises, we're assuming that you're using an
x64 based machine. Should you be using an alternative architecture, such as
Arm, you'll need to change the architecture of the base image that you're using
in the Dockerfiles.

We're going to use `balenalib` based images in the remainder of the exercises in
this Masterclass, as they include useful images which are 'ready to go' with
various languages, libraries, etc.

Load a code editor of your choice, and edit the `Dockerfile` file in the
`simple-docker-app` directory. Add the following:
```
FROM balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest

COPY * /usr/src/app/

RUN cd /usr/src/app \
    && npm install

CMD ["/usr/local/bin/node", "/usr/src/app/index.js"]
```
Ensure you have a newline at the end of the Dockerfile. Let's quickly run
through exactly what this Dockerfile does:

`FROM balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest`
This declares that the Docker image built should inherit from the
`balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest` image, which in this case is the latest

> Debian NodeJS image built and tagged by balena. This image includes all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Debian Node.js image built and tagged by balena. This image includes all
```

Reviewer 2: Assuming that's the correct terminology then there are a few more references to this.

Author: Done.

standard Debian packages, binaries and libraries, as well as a copy of the

> NodeJS language and runtime, and NPM. This allows us to easily run the NodeJS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Node.js language and runtime, and npm. This allows us to easily run the node.js
```

Author: Done.

techniques later in the Masterclass.

We can now list the images by running:
```
$ docker images
REPOSITORY                        TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED             SIZE
simple-docker-app                 latest              630b3919abb5        14 minutes ago      272MB
balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node   latest              4498fe12b99e        11 hours ago        270MB
```
Note that each image has a repository name, tag and image ID. Most Docker
commands working with images can take the name of the container or the ID.
If using the container name, note that a Docker image repository name can be
used with or without a tag, however if there is more than one tag for an image's
Docker repository name, the `latest` version will be assumed if not given.

More information about repository naming and tags will be discussed in a later
exercise.

As you can see, we have a total of two images. The first is expected, because
this is the image we just built (`simple-docker-app`), but the base image that
our Docker image has inherited from is also present
(`balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node`). This is because Docker stores each image,

> including base images that other inherit, separately inside the system. When

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
including base images that others inherit, separately inside the system. When
```

Author: Done.

and Windows, these kernels are supplied by minimal Linux VMs that are closely
bound to the underlying host OS so that contexts such as device nodes,
networking, etc. are available to the VM kernel and therefore the container
running on it.

This explains why OS resources are acquired by containers dynamically (and also
released when no longer required), as each running process only consumes what it
needs, as it essentially *is* running on the host OS, albeit in a file system
and resource sandbox.

#### 6.1 Running a Container

To run an image as a container, we can use the
[`docker run`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/run/)
command. We can either pass the repository and tag name or use the ID. We'll
just simply ask `docker run` to use the `simple-docker-app` image, without a tag
(which will assume it should use the `latest` tag):
```
$ docker run --tty simple-docker-app

> simple-docker-app@1.0.0 start /usr/src/app
> node index.js

Echo server is up and listening...
```
We'll explain the significance of `--tty` later, but for now it just means that
we can stop the container using `Ctrl+C` when we're done with it.

> The act of running the creates a new container instance based on that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The act of running creates a new container instance based on that
```

Author: Done.

636c8f11fee2        simple-docker-app   "/usr/bin/entry.sh /…"   20 minutes ago      Exited (0) 3 minutes ago                           epic_montalcini
0579294093b6        f50ceee6da24        "/usr/bin/entry.sh /…"   51 minutes ago      Exited (0) 26 minutes ago                          jolly_banzai
61578a11c16e        d00c59983bd8        "/usr/bin/entry.sh /…"   About an hour ago   Exited (0) About an hour ago                       tender_gagarin
```
However, looking at the list, this seems strange at first. We we just kept
running our `simple-docker-app`, so why are there several instances of it? Well,
every time we used `docker run simple-docker-app`, we were asking the Docker
daemon to run a *new* instance of the image, not to run the same container
image that we had before.

### 7. Tags and Caching in Docker Builds

We've previously built an image using `docker build`, but currently if we make
any changes this rebuilds the entire image. In this section, we'll learn how
to tag images to give them versioning information, as well as how to use
caching to ensure quicker rebuilding of images.

#### 7.1 Tagging Images

> You can also see from the  container list that only the last container ran using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also see from the container list that only the last container ran using
```

Author: Done.

 ---> a59c235d0394
Step 6/7 : RUN echo "I'm a new layer!"
 ---> Running in 2ffe6005e09e
I'm a new layer!
Removing intermediate container 2ffe6005e09e
 ---> c9d98338032c
Step 7/7 : CMD ["/usr/local/bin/npm", "start"]
 ---> Running in 5b954db009d2
Removing intermediate container 5b954db009d2
 ---> 8c3c0d4e9665
Successfully built 8c3c0d4e9665
Successfully tagged simple-docker-app:latest
```
We can see from the build output though, that it has *not* used the cache for
all the steps up to the new directive. In fact, although it used the cache for
the `FROM`, `EXPOSE` and `WORKDIR` steps, it created a new layer for the `COPY`
command onwards. But we didn't change anything else apart from the Dockerfile!
Well, that actually explains exactly the reason *why* it created a new layer
from that point onwards. Let's look at the `COPY` command:
```
COPY * /usr/src/app/
```
This says to copy everything from the current build context into the
`/usr/src/app` directory inside the image. But this *includes* the Dockerfile
itself, which we've changed. Because of this, the layer output would not be
the same as the ones from previous builds, as the contents of the Dockerfile

> is now different. There's a pretty obvious way round this, which is to *not*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are now different. There's a pretty obvious way round this, which is to *not*
```

Author: Done.

Step 1/7 : FROM balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest
 ---> 4498fe12b99e
Step 2/7 : EXPOSE 9854
 ---> Using cache
 ---> ff63da014498
Step 3/7 : WORKDIR /usr/src/app
 ---> Using cache
 ---> 568a5e43a29e
Step 4/7 : COPY package.json /usr/src/app/
 ---> Using cache
 ---> 2c51ccf2a7b2
Step 5/7 : RUN npm install
 ---> Using cache
 ---> 1705ac26c046
Step 6/7 : COPY index.js /usr/src/app/
 ---> 5233ceadf248
Step 7/7 : CMD ["/usr/local/bin/npm", "start"]
 ---> Running in 0c15ac7cfc32
Removing intermediate container 0c15ac7cfc32
 ---> 81a2fcf7791c
Successfully built 81a2fcf7791c
Successfully tagged simple-docker-app:latest
```
The build was far quicker as NPM didn't have to reinstall the used modules
again, and the filesystem layer already built was reused:
```
Step 5/7 : RUN npm install
 ---> Using cache
```
By considering how your Dockerfile is constructed, and how the cache may be
utilized is an extremely valuable part of using Docker. Whilst the example
we've used is very simplistic, for builds where a Dockerfile is many lines long
this can be critical in cutting down build time from hours to minutes.

### 8. Running Containers in Detached, Command and Interactive Modes

> So far we've `docker run` to create a new container, which outputs all STDIO

Reviewer 2: Probably expand STDIO?

Author: I've replaced it properly.

to the console.

> However, there are multiple ways in which a container can be instanced.

Reviewer 2: I'm not familiar with "instanced" in this context, is that common terminology? Should it be instantiated or just created to simplify.

Author: Instanced is used, but I'll change it to instantiated. They're both over docker docs, so it's worth a reader getting used to them.

process that might need to be manually terminated.

#### 8.3 Interactive Mode

##### 8.3.1 Via `docker run`

Docker containers can also run in interactive mode. The STDIN stream is passed
to the container from the host, which allows input directly into the container.
The `--interactive` (shortened form `-i`) passed to `docker run` allows this,
and it's usually used in conjunction with `--tty` (shortened form `-t`) to
allocate a psuedo terminal to the container. This allows us to perform many
operations as well as send signals (which is why `Ctrl+C` stops the container
running), but is also a very good way of quickly running interactive commands
in the container. Because we're using NodeJS inside our container to run the
listening HTTP server, we can use interactive mode to get a psuedo terminal into
the NodeJS interpretter. Run the following:
```
$ docker run --interactive --tty --publish "9854:9854" simple-docker-app /usr/local/bin/node
Welcome to Node.js v13.9.0.
Type ".help" for more information.
>
```
As you can see, we've now been able to gain a TTY into the NodeJS process.
Feel free to run some JavaScript statements in it, and when you've finished

> hit `Ctrl+C` twice to exit the interpretter. This will finish the interactive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hit `Ctrl+C` twice to exit the interpreter. This will finish the interactive
```

Author: Done.

session within the container, and the container (because we overrode the default
command by running `/usr/local/bin/node`) will stop.

> Most non-ligthweight Docker images are built based on top of a Linux

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most non-lightweight Docker images are built based on top of a Linux
```

Author: Done.

distribution of one kind or another. Our particular image was built using Debian

> Buster as it's base. Because of this, we can very easily use the inbuilt `bash`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Buster as its base. Because of this, we can very easily use the inbuilt `bash`
```

Author: Done.

root@6c4e438ffa43:/usr/src/app# # ps -ae
  PID TTY          TIME CMD
    1 ?        00:00:00 npm
   30 ?        00:00:00 sh
   31 ?        00:00:00 node
   42 pts/0    00:00:00 bash
   48 pts/0    00:00:00 ps
```
We now have a bash shell into the container and as we can see, the `npm start`
from the `CMD` in the Dockerfile is running correctly as PID 1.

### 9. Bind Mounts and Volumes

As we've discussed previously, when an image is run and becomes a container
instance it uses the image's layers as the base filing system for that
container. Whenever a container makes changes to the file system, a new layer
is created for that specific container instance with the relevant changes.

Because of this, any changes that the container makes to the filing system is
only persistent for the life of that particular instance. Other instances will
use different layers, and none of these changes will occur in the image.

Deletion or recreation of the container will see these container instance layers
discarded. Whilst this is useful for transient files and directories, there are
times when files need to persist.

> For example, suppose you've written a application where one Docker image deals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, suppose you've written an application where one Docker image deals
```

Author: Done.

container. This allows the container to then use the bind mount or the volume as
another filesystem path within the container, which allows for persistent
storage outside of the container.

#### 9.1 Bind Mounts

Bind mounts are directories or files that pre-exist on the Docker host machine
that, when specified on running or creating a new container, get bound into the
container at a given destination path within that container.

This essentially allows the host machine's filesystem structure to be shared
with a container. Any changes made to the bound directory/file inside the
container will therefore change in the host, and vice versa.

To bind a directory or filepath to a container, simply use the
[`--mount`](https://docs.docker.com/storage/bind-mounts/) switch passed to
`docker run` or `docker create`. `--mount` takes several options (separated by
commas), which allows the source filepath, destination filepath, type of mount,
etc. to be specified.

Let's carry out a quick example of this. We'll use the
`balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node` image to create a new container which binds
to an already existing directory structure. Run the following in the terminal

> to change to the example directory and start running a new container which we'll

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to change to the  bind-mounts-and-volumes directory and start running a new container which we'll
```

Author: Done.

mounts were specified with the `--volume` option. This diverged when volumes
became first class Docker citizens, which is when `--mount` was introduced.
Whilst you *can* attach a bind mount to a container using `--volume`, it is
not recommended for those coming into Docker, as it reinforces legacy behaviour.
Try to only use `--mount` for bind mounts and `--volume` for Docker volumes.
Another important note is that a directory or file used for bind mounting must
exist prior to the mount occuring.

#### 9.2 Volumes

Volumes, unlike bind mounts, are Docker managed storage areas which can also
be mounted into a container. Unlike bind mounts a directory path is not passed
to the container, but the name of the volume itself. This has several
immediately obvious benefit that only the name of the volume is required to
work with it instead of a filepath. Another big advantage is that volumes can
be of many forms, and not just of local filesystem hierarchies. There are
volume drivers for NFS, `tmpfs` and others for example, which allows them to
be far more flexible than bind mounts.

For these exercises, we're just going to use a local filesystem volume.

> Volumes, if not pre-existing, are created when a new container than it is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Volumes, if not pre-existing, are created when a new container that it is
```

Author: Dine,

By default, Docker drops almost all capabilities for a container that are not
directly required for processes to run in them. Other capabilities are added
via a 'whitelist' to open up more functionality.

Containers also run their own network stacks. As we've already seen, just
because a container has a process listening on a defined port, it doesn't mean
that any traffic will actually make it into the container. There's essentially a
firewall between the container and the host's networking interfaces, and the act
of publishing ports on a container allows traffic through that firewall. Users
can also create their own Docker networks, and then run containers specifying
these networks so that containers can communicate with each other, and the host,
where required. These networks essentially contain their own namespacing, so
that they can only interact if given permission to do so. The
[Docker networking overview](https://docs.docker.com/network/)
is a good place to start to read up on networking features.

Docker containers are all subject to the use of control groups (also known as
`cgroups`). Control groups allocate host resources that can be used by a

> container, and as such limit can limit the amount of CPU, memory or I/O usage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
container, and as such can limit the amount of CPU, memory or I/O usage
```

Author: Done.

for it. This ensures that a rogue container cannot disrupt a host OS to the
point of bringing it down or making it unusable. Control groups for a container
are configurable, so a user can alter the resources available to it when
required. By default, Docker doesn't limit resources to containers, so in theory
you could max out the host OS by running an extremely CPU intensive process in a
container, or by using all its memory (though usually the OOM killer will kick
in). However, Docker allows you to specify limits when you run a container, and
it will then create appropriate `cgroup` rules on the host to limit the
container's resource use. More information on cgroups can be found on the
[Wikipedia page for cgroups](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cgroups)
here.

Containers can also use other security features in the Linux kernel, such as
[SELinux](https://selinuxproject.org/page/Main_Page) and
[AppArmor](https://gitlab.com/apparmor/apparmor) to further ensure that
containers are only given access to what they need.

> Now that we know that a container has it's own networking, namespace and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we know that a container has its own networking, namespace and
```

Author: Done.

(potentially) limited `cgroups` rules, we can relax a bit knowing that there's
little chance of a container doing anything nasty to the host OS without the
knowledge of the user who's running it.

In fact, we've seen this already when creating our first container, where
although the HTTP server was listening inside the container, Docker did not
allow traffic from the host to the container unless the appropriate ports were

> published. This is because the container was running it's own network stack and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
published. This is because the container was running its own network stack and
```

Author: Done.

apart from the Linux kernel.

This Masterclass is an aside to the rest of the balena Masterclasses, in that
it focuses specifically on Docker, from the basics to some 'deep dives' into
how containers (and other components) function and are constructed.

It is anticipated that after reading the basic sections of this Masterclass,
the reading of the
[Services Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io/services-masterclass)
will allow anybody to develop balena applications and services.

## Hardware and Software Requirements

It is assumed that the reader has access to the following:

* A locally cloned copy of this repository,
	[Docker Masterclass](https://github.com/balena-io/docker-masterclass).
	Either:
  * `git clone https://github.com/balena-io/docker-masterclass.git`
  * Download ZIP file (from 'Clone or download'->'Download ZIP') and then unzip it to a suitable directory
* A suitable text editor for developing code on your development platform (eg.
    [Visual Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/))
* A suitable shell environment for command execution (such as `bash`)
* A local installation of [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/v17.09/engine/installation/)

> 	as well as a familiarity with [Dockerfiles](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/)

Reviewer 2: Probably remove this line as this is actually covered later...

Author: Yep, that's a really good point. :)

Author: Especially as it assumes no familiarity with Dockerfiles! :)

```
# Will use simple-base as a base images, so all the files/directories from
# simple-base are now available to work on.
FROM simple-base
```
You'll note that comments can be used in Dockerfiles, by simply using `#` at
the start of the line, very much like Linux/Unix shell operations.

Further directives in the file can carry out operations on the inherited
filesystem, as well as creating new layers which include new or modified
directories and files. Every time the filesystem is modified via the Dockerfile,
a new layer is created. This usually occurs after each directive.

As well as inheriting from base images, it's also possible to start a completely
new Docker image which does not include any layers. This can be achieved by
using the special image name `scratch`. This tells Docker it shouldn't try to
inherit from any other image, but start a brand new set of layers. In fact, this
is how a large number of 'standard' base images start, such as the Docker
versions of Linux distributions, by starting from `scratch` and copying in all
of the files that build up that distribution of Linux.

#### 4.2 [`COPY`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#copy) Directive

> Now we now how to use a base image to start with a filesystem in our own image,

Reviewer 2: Typo now -> know how

but how do we get new files into it?

This is where the `COPY` directive comes in. This allows the copying of files
from the host's local filesystem into the Docker image being built. It's fairly
similar to the standard copying commands under most OS variants in
that it takes the location of a source file or directory on the host and a
destination where the contents of the source should be copied inside the image.
`COPY` preserves all flags on the file when copied. For example, if you copy
a shell script that has the execution flag set this will be preserved when
copied into the image.

**NOTE:** The directory location of the Dockerfile being used to build the image

>     the image is known as the build context. Any files in the build context, or

Reviewer 2: there is a duplicate "the image"

Author: Done.

>     any of it's sub-directory hierarchy, is also part of the build context.

Reviewer 2: it's->its

Author: Done.

    This can be changed by other commands, but this is the default and we'll be
    using it for the moment.

The following will recursively copy the contents of the  `directory-3`
directory in the current build context into the image at the location
`/directory-3`:
```
COPY directory-3 /directory-3/
```
Note that you need to add the trailing `/` to the destination directory. If
the destination directory doesn't already exist, it'll be dynamically created
(which means you can specify a nested destination directory without having to
run `mkdir` in the image).

Wildcards also work, so that the following:
```
COPY * /all-the-files/
```
Will recursively copy *everything* (including the Dockerfile) in the current
build context to the `/all-the-files/` directory in the built image.

It should be noted that the source of files are *always* relative to the build
context. Therefore files must be available to that context (you can't, for
example, reference files that are in the directory above where the Dockerfile
is, because it's not within the same context).

> `COPY` has a few switches that include abilities to set ownership and

Reviewer 2: optional nit but aren't these more commonly referred to as options?

Author: They are more commonly referred to (but incorrectly) as options; I'd really like to stick with switches though as it's actually more formally correct.

`list-files.sh` in the current build context that was simply:
```
#!/bin/bash
ls -l /
```
We could copy this into the Docker image during the build and then run it:
```
COPY list-files.sh /list-files.sh

RUN /list-files.sh > /files.txt \
    && cat /files.txt
```
This would copy the script into the image at location `/list-files.sh`, and
then run that script to get a list of all the entries in the root directory to
a file and then outputing the contents to the build.

#### 4.4 [`CMD`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#cmd) Directive

The `CMD` directive is usually the last directive in a Dockerfile. This informs
Docker what should be run when a container instance is created from an image.

This tends to be a call to a single binary or script. Once the call has
finished, the container will exit. Because most Docker images are designed
around services or daemons (for example a web server or similar), it's unusual
for a `CMD` to not start up a daemon or script that restarts should that service
exit. But this doesn't mean it has to be like that.

Taking the example from the `RUN` directive explanation, the following will set

> the entrance command to list the entries in the root of the file system:

Reviewer 2: optional nit entrance is likely redundant here or simply will "run the command"

Author: I've clarified this, `run the command` needs to be put in context as it obviously won't run it at build time.

started, there should only ever be *one* `CMD` directive in a Dockerfile. If
more than one exist, only the *last* `CMD` directive seen will be run. Sometimes
this can be useful, if you want to use a base image which usually runs as a
service, but wish to override the `CMD` directive from that base image (perhaps
you want to run with different parameters, or use the base image because of the
filesystem layers it includes).

The `CMD` directive can also be used in conjunction with the `ENTRYPOINT`
directive, which we'll describe in a more advanced Docker Masterclass.

### 5. Building a Docker Image

Now that we know some of the basic Dockerfile directives, it's worth learning
how to put some of these together to build a simple Docker image.

For convenience, export a variable to point to the root of this masterclass
repository, as we'll use this for the rest of the exercises, e.g.:
```
$ export BALENA_DOCKER_MASTERCLASS=~/docker-masterclass
```
Now change directory to the simple-docker-app directory in the root of this
masterclass repository, e.g.:
```
$ cd $BALENA_DOCKER_MASTERCLASS/simple-docker-app
```
Note that for the rest of these exercises, we're assuming that you're using an

> x64 based machine. Should you be using an alternative architecture, such as

Reviewer 2: optional is x86-64 more common or being more verbose and saying 64-bit x86?

Author: x64 is well enough known I think.

Arm, you'll need to change the architecture of the base image that you're using
in the Dockerfiles.

We're going to use `balenalib` based images in the remainder of the exercises in
this Masterclass, as they include useful images which are 'ready to go' with
various languages, libraries, etc.

Load a code editor of your choice, and edit the `Dockerfile` file in the
`simple-docker-app` directory. Add the following:
```
FROM balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest

COPY * /usr/src/app/

RUN cd /usr/src/app \
    && npm install

CMD ["/usr/local/bin/node", "/usr/src/app/index.js"]
```
Ensure you have a newline at the end of the Dockerfile. Let's quickly run
through exactly what this Dockerfile does:

`FROM balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest`
This declares that the Docker image built should inherit from the
`balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest` image, which in this case is the latest

> Debian Node.js image built and tagged by balena. This image includes all

Reviewer 2: without opening a can of worms wouldn't it be more accurate to say it is the image "tagged as latest" rather than the "latest" which implies the time it was built as these don't always coincide.

Author: If you don't explicitly tag an image, then it automatically becomes the `latest`. If you do explicitly tag the image `latest`, then you're saying 'this is the latest good version of the image we've built`, even if this is an older version, because you may end up having to roll back an image if for some reason a newer (**not** latest) version regresses. The key words here a 'latest good', because latest absolutely doesn't imply the time it was built. It's just the 'latest' good version of a release. As such, I'm keeping this as is unless there's a better argument against it. :)

Reviewer 2: I understand r.e. the Docker side and I was more coming from an English angle of the word "latest" whose literal definition is of most recent date. I'm reminded of articles like this https://vsupalov.com/docker-latest-tag/. That being said, keep it like it is 😆

standard Debian packages, binaries and libraries, as well as a copy of the
Node.js language and runtime, and npm. This allows us to easily run the Node.js

> sourcecode located in `index.js`.

Reviewer 2: source code

Author: Done!

68ced04f60ab: Pulling fs layer
1418738fb4eb: Pulling fs layer
28ddf06c756e: Pull complete
6544792768e8: Pull complete
6e7ea75f4464: Pull complete
38aca9ee3123: Pull complete
5e30c86f7b84: Pull complete
12febcfb1db1: Pull complete
4acc7449c8c2: Pull complete
45be4c06aae8: Pull complete
Digest: sha256:0a613216d7a23e2ebbb54c0d42f420e8ba65b7d5507149a6690141e4ed700531
Status: Downloaded newer image for balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest
 ---> 4498fe12b99e
Step 2/4 : COPY * /usr/src/app/
 ---> d9fad658bc39
Step 3/4 : RUN cd /usr/src/app     && npm install
 ---> Running in 5f4a3fa70ea5
npm WARN simple-docker-app@1.0.0 No description
npm WARN simple-docker-app@1.0.0 No repository field.

added 50 packages from 37 contributors and audited 126 packages in 4.182s
found 0 vulnerabilities

Removing intermediate container 5f4a3fa70ea5
 ---> 526ffdc6d52e
Step 4/4 : CMD ["/usr/local/bin/node", "/usr/src/app/index.js"]
 ---> Running in 9f9c787b7a1d
Removing intermediate container 9f9c787b7a1d
 ---> 630b3919abb5
Successfully built 630b3919abb5
Successfully tagged simple-docker-app:latest
```
The `docker build` command itself instructs the Docker daemon to build a new

> image, the `--tag` (shortened form `-t`) switch informs it how to name the image

Reviewer 2: related to the above comment I'd use option instead of switch

Author: Sticking with switch.

Another really important point to note here is that when a Dockerfile is
processed, new layers for that image are created by particular directives.
Generally, new layers are created by each new Dockerfile directive (this is not
always true, but at this point, thinking about it in this way is useful). As
such, consolidating command into statements such as `RUN` can be useful, as it
limits the number of layers produced in an image. We'll go more into these
techniques later in the Masterclass.

We can now list the images by running:
```
$ docker images
REPOSITORY                        TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED             SIZE
simple-docker-app                 latest              630b3919abb5        14 minutes ago      272MB
balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node   latest              4498fe12b99e        11 hours ago        270MB
```
Note that each image has a repository name, tag and image ID. Most Docker
commands working with images can take the name of the container or the ID.
If using the container name, note that a Docker image repository name can be
used with or without a tag, however if there is more than one tag for an image's

> Docker repository name, the `latest` version will be assumed if not given.

Reviewer 2: optional version->tag i.e. the `latest` tag will be assumed if not given

Author: Version was a terrible word, 'tag' is correct!

all we need to know is that to ensure that traffic can get in and out of the
container so that Express can receive traffic on port 9854, we need to run the
container with the `--publish` command to signal to the Docker daemon that we'd
like to 'publish' traffic into it from the host OS.

We're going to re-run the image again, but this time specifying that the
right port should be opened up into the container. In T1, run the following:
```
$ docker run --tty --publish 9854:9854 simple-docker-app

> simple-docker-app@1.0.0 start /usr/src/app
> node index.js

Echo server is up and listening...
```
Note that we specified 9854 *twice* as the arguments to the `--publish` switch
(this can be shortened to `-p`).
This isn't an error, but it lets us map a specific port inside the container
to a port on the host. In this case, we want both port numbers to be the same,
but you can change the host port by altering the first argument to be the port
on the host you want to use, ie.
`--publish <hostPort>:<containerPort>`.
As a final note, `--publish` also allows ranges of ports from the host to be
published (for example mapping all traffic from ports 1234 to 1238 on the host

> to a single port inside the container).

Reviewer 2: worth adding that as an example?

Author: Done.

```
Aha! Now we can see that the `PORTS` section has a value in it,
`0.0.0.0:9854->9854/tcp`. This states that port `9854` on IP address `0.0.0.0`
on the host OS is mapped to port `9854/tcp` inside the container. A couple of
things to note are that by default, unless otherwise specified, the Docker
daemon will allow traffic coming into the host on any interface through the
specified port into the container (hence `0.0.0.0` which states any IP assigned
to a valid host network interface). We could have specified a set IP address for
the host, for example if we wanted only to let traffic coming through localhost
into the container, we could use `--publish 127.0.0.1:9854/9854`.
Additionally you can see that the traffic entering the container from the host
on port 9854 is going to port `9854/tcp` in the container. TCP is always the
default if not otherwise stated. To use UDP instead, simply prefix the published
ports list with `/udp`, eg. `--publish 9854/udp:9854/udp` would map any traffic
from UDP port 9854 on the host to UDP port 9854 in the container.

> Finally let's try `curl` again in T2:

Reviewer 2: Finally let's try the `curl` command again in T2:

Author: Done.

T1 from this point as 'the terminal' again.

#### 6.6 Container Instances

One thing you may have spotted whilst we were stopping and rerunning our Docker
image was that the name and the ID of the container kept changing.

In the terminal, run the following:
```
$ docker ps --all
CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND                  CREATED             STATUS                         PORTS               NAMES
636c8f11fee2        simple-docker-app   "/usr/bin/entry.sh /…"   20 minutes ago      Exited (0) 3 minutes ago                           epic_montalcini
0579294093b6        f50ceee6da24        "/usr/bin/entry.sh /…"   51 minutes ago      Exited (0) 26 minutes ago                          jolly_banzai
61578a11c16e        d00c59983bd8        "/usr/bin/entry.sh /…"   About an hour ago   Exited (0) About an hour ago                       tender_gagarin
```
However, looking at the list, this seems strange at first. We we just kept
running our `simple-docker-app`, so why are there several instances of it? Well,
every time we used `docker run simple-docker-app`, we were asking the Docker
daemon to run a *new* instance of the image, not to run the same container

> image that we had before.

Reviewer 2: Worth adding another quick reference to docker start for the case to reuse an existing stopped container?

Author: Not adding another example, but I've reference the command.

### 7. Tags and Caching in Docker Builds

We've previously built an image using `docker build`, but currently if we make
any changes this rebuilds the entire image. In this section, we'll learn how
to tag images to give them versioning information, as well as how to use
caching to ensure quicker rebuilding of images.

#### 7.1 Tagging Images

You can also see from the container list that only the last container ran using
the `simple-docker-app` image, but why is this? If you remember earlier we
discussed that each image name had a repository and tag section. Because we
have rebuilt the image several times with changes to the Dockerfile, we've

> actually changed the resulting image's filing system layers and unique hash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actually changed the resulting image's file system layers and unique hash.
```

Author: Done.

Deleted: sha256:6774853e36677eac96d376174993694fc24daa455724ba99b498d30eaaff581c
Deleted: sha256:191098869ebd8201a2e909969fb26db0a13d5ed20dc807bdb639c52fa0cd3aa5
Deleted: sha256:255db71d63d0f14a6babfed360cc8317c6f060046902c2492d25edbdd6efd74e
Deleted: sha256:54b05cf3c2b53f3aa35b63d6e517dcc66ad4e5c04cf3e10f8a77685b964b3b11
Deleted: sha256:5a8535c5253022eb99d04334c697d356cd6d28876965cc55f9c8cc8976ba44c5
Deleted: sha256:f77bc377ce89acd6568b3640f2d17ab69fba419f3c45ea5036842188fe610baa
Deleted: sha256:52638c47b14625df47fc7ece74f6508c056181e965e2acbc7e4e1ae269f7a0d0
Deleted: sha256:bd032d966a12ff731c1a46bf62b0fe079d4c412d3e290d4f6321c483ea9eb2eb
Deleted: sha256:6d378e46857b5177133d61d45333dae1f29e6171914bc5ee7bcc7e2f0fc75c17
Deleted: sha256:f2cb0ecef392f2a630fa1205b874ab2e2aedf96de04d0b8838e4e728e28142da
```
This will wipe *all* images and containers from the local repository. Let's
quickly break down what that command did:
```
docker rm $(docker ps --all --quiet)
```
The `docker ps --all --quiet` command lists all instances of containers, running
or not, and output their IDs and nothing else (the `--quiet` switch, which can

> also be shortened to `-q`). The `$()` wrapper pipes this to the `docker rm`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also be shortened to `-q`). The `$()` wrapper executes this for the `docker rm`
```

Author: Done.

command, which then removes each of these container IDs from the local
repository. You can individually remove a container instance either by using its
name or ID, eg. `docker rm <IDorName>`.

After this, the next command is run:
```
docker rmi $(docker images --quiet)
```
Similarly to the `docker ps` command, the `--quiet` switch to `docker images`

> will only output the IDs of the images. This is then piped to `docker rmi`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will only output the IDs of the images. This is then executed for `docker rmi`
```

Reviewer: I guess i've never really considered command substitution a form of piping, but i can't think of a good reason that's not correct. Feel free to ignore, you probably know better than me!

Author: Either way works (piping is not technically incorrect). I'm happy to replace with executed.

Successfully tagged simple-docker-app:v0.0.2
Successfully tagged simple-docker-app:latest
```
And run:
```
$ docker images
REPOSITORY                        TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED              SIZE
simple-docker-app                 latest              d7fefc78916d        22 seconds ago       273MB
simple-docker-app                 v0.0.2              d7fefc78916d        22 seconds ago       273MB
<none>                            <none>              4817e03f7def        About a minute ago   273MB
simple-docker-app                 v0.0.1              25d3625211c2        3 minutes ago        273MB
balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node   latest              4498fe12b99e        38 hours ago         270MB
```
We now have a new version, `v0.0.2`, which is also the `latest` version. We also
still have our original version, `v0.0.1`. But note that the version we built
without a tag has now been stripped of its repository and `latest` tag. Because
Docker was not given a full `repository:tag` name for the image, and because
we've moved the `latest` tag on, it's had to remove the name and tag from that
image, and it is now only know by it's original ID (`4817e03f7def`).

> 

Reviewer 2: Also worth a mention or a link to `docker tag` command?

Author: I actually reference it in the repository section where it gets used, so it should be clearer there.

#### 7.2 Build Caching

Usually, especially during development of a Docker service, you'll want to
change things such as the packages being installed into the image, the source
code for the application itself, configuration files, etc.

Whilst our small example Docker image builds quite quickly, if we were to start
building very large images we wouldn't want the entire image to be rebuilt from
scratch every time we changed a source file that had nothing to do with OS
packages being installed.

As we've previously mentioned, when building an image each Dockerfile directive
(known as a step) is processed in serial, and these usually result in new
layers. However, when building an image, the Docker daemon actually examines the
directive and the layers already in the local repository, and determines if it
actually needs to create a new layer for that directive or just re-use what
already exists.

> Let's visualise an example here to make it a bit clearer. Taking the contents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's visualize an example here to make it a bit clearer. Taking the contents
```

Author: So, interesting fact, in Canada apparently this is completely arbitrary. You choose whichever spelling you like. :)

Author: (And done)

```
$ docker run --interactive --tty --publish "9854:9854" simple-docker-app /bin/bash
root@30e19e9a868b:/usr/src/app#
```
Again, because we overrode the default command, the HTTP server isn't listening,
but because we've started an interactive container session using the shell,
we can actually easily run it:
```
root@30e19e9a868b:/usr/src/app# npm start

> simple-docker-app@1.0.0 start /usr/src/app
> node index.js

Echo server is up and listening...
```
If you now sent a `curl` command to the HTTP server, it would respond
appropriately.

Finally, exit and stop the container by using `Ctrl+C` to stop the HTTP server
and then `exit` to leave the interactive bash shell in the container.

##### 8.3.2 Via [`docker exec`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/exec/)

Whilst `docker run` in interactive mode is very useful for examining the
container and its contents, because we're overriding the default command from
the Dockerfile, it means we have to manually run the command which would have
otherwise run on startup if we want to see the container running 'as normal'.

There is another command though that allows us to run a command in an already

> running container. This is `docker exec`, and it behaves in the same was as

Reviewer 2: was->way

Author: Done.

sending a command parameter to `docker run`, except that it does this on already
running containers.

To demonstrate, run a container in detached mode to start the HTTP server:
```
$ docker run --detach --publish "9854:9854" simple-docker-app
6c4e438ffa43683d7cb8a9f52ba72c4ec874acd11cd5842ae34cba8243c3c527
```

> As we're running in detached mode, so we can now send a `curl` command to prove

Reviewer 2: remove "so"

Author: Done.

the HTTP server is listening:
```
$ curl -XPOST http://localhost:9854/echo -H 'Content-type: text/plain' -d 'Running echo!'
Running echo!
```
As we have the ID of the running container, we can now execute a command using
`docker exec` (obviously change the container ID appropriately):
```
$ docker exec --interactive --tty 6c4e438ffa43683d7cb8a9f52ba72c4ec874acd11cd5842ae34cba8243c3c527 /bin/bash
root@6c4e438ffa43:/usr/src/app# # ps -ae
  PID TTY          TIME CMD
    1 ?        00:00:00 npm
   30 ?        00:00:00 sh
   31 ?        00:00:00 node
   42 pts/0    00:00:00 bash
   48 pts/0    00:00:00 ps
```
We now have a bash shell into the container and as we can see, the `npm start`
from the `CMD` in the Dockerfile is running correctly as PID 1.

Finally stop the container:
```
$ docker stop 6c4e438ffa43683d7cb8a9f52ba72c4ec874acd11cd5842ae34cba8243c3c527
```

### 9. Bind Mounts and Volumes

As we've discussed previously, when an image is run and becomes a container

> instance it uses the image's layers as the base filing system for that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instance it uses the image's layers as the base file system for that
```

container. Whenever a container makes changes to the file system, a new layer
is created for that specific container instance with the relevant changes.

> Because of this, any changes that the container makes to the filing system is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of this, any changes that the container makes to the file system is
```

Author: Done.

Deletion or recreation of the container will see these container instance layers
discarded. Whilst this is useful for transient files and directories, there are
times when files need to persist.

For example, suppose you've written an application where one Docker image deals
with storing and retrieving data from a database. A container instanced from the
image *could* store all of the data in a new layer, but should you want to
change the underlying code, create a new version of the image and then use it,
you can't update to this new version without either throwing all of the stored
data away or carrying out a very painful migration of the data from the old
container instance to the new.

This is where bind mounts and volumes become useful. When a container is
created or run, you can specify a bind mount or a volume to attach to that
container. This allows the container to then use the bind mount or the volume as
another filesystem path within the container, which allows for persistent
storage outside of the container.

#### 9.1 Bind Mounts

Bind mounts are directories or files that pre-exist on the Docker host machine

> that, when specified on running or creating a new container, get bound into the

Reviewer 2: I think this needs some punctuation? i.e. when specified on running, or creating a new, container, get bound into the

Author: Yeah, that read terribly, have added a comma!

Docker for macOS, because the processes running will actually occur under the
VM and *not* the host OS). The following command will run the Docker container
for 60 seconds (whilst it sleeps) before exiting, and whilst it sleeps we'll
have a look at the process running:
```
$ whoami
heds
$ docker run --detach simple-docker-app sleep 60
1d9ad9d967c020ce1766a9080d05150e5e67f88c2d9980f7e3bd3cc3ef7751f4
$ ps aux | grep "[s]leep"
root      9384 18.0  0.0   4052   748 ?        Ss   23:26   0:00 /bin/sleep 60
```
The first line carries out a `whoami` to print the current user of the host OS,
the second starts our detached running container and the third searches the
host's process list for a command running `sleep`. This final command finds the
running container process (which is run as a child of the Docker daemon), but...
it's running as the `root` user, not as `heds`!

How can this be? Well, the Docker daemon is actually running (if you've
installed it using the default method) under the `root` user, and because of
this any process running in a container is also run by the `root` user.

Even though the default is to run as `root`, it's usually better to ensure that

> the processes in a container run as a suitable user. There's a very easy way to

Reviewer 2: Add a link to USER directive here? https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#user

Author: Done.

where we determined which base image to use:
```
FROM balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node:latest
```
As we know, this tells Docker which image to base the rest of the image we're
building on. As you may also remember, on the first build, this downloaded the
image. This download came from a remote Docker registry, which Docker itself
hosts, called Docker Hub. Any user with an account on Docker Hub can upload
images they've built so that other users can download them and run them, or use
them as base images. Docker has both public and private registries, depending
on the type of account (unpaid accounts only allow the maximum of one private
repository, with all others being public, whereas paid accounts allow more
private repositories). Docker Hub is the default Docker registry that is used
when installing Docker, but other registries can also be used including private
ones that you can run yourself. We'll discuss this in a future Masterclass.

We discussed tags in a previous section, where we noted that tags that we give
images are of the format `repository:tag`. A repository name denotes a specific
location in a registry for a group of images. On Docker Hub, repositories are

> usually denoted by the name of a user or organisation using the registry and

Reviewer 2: Maybe for ease of reading forward slash, though as the example follows feel free to ignore that.

Author: Changed from solidus.

then the repository name itself, these being split by the use of a solidus
(`/`). For example, the base image we were using was a balena image, in the
repository where it stores all of its base images. The base images are owned by
the `balenalib` user, and the repository name is the device type they use as
well as the functionality they include, hence `balenalib/intel-nuc-debian-node`
is a base image owned by `balenalib` which runs on an `intel-nuc` device based

> on a `debian` Linux distribution and includes `node` (Node.js). Simply, a

Reviewer 2: Typo `user/repository-name`

Author: Done.

```
$ docker tag simple-docker-app:v0.0.2 whaleway/simple-docker-app:v0.0.2
$ docker push dockerhub/simple-docker-app:v0.0.2
The push refers to repository [docker.io/dockerhub/simple-docker-app]
d217d415dd8d: Pushed
715dcd4f6062: Pushed
77b61c32e3ac: Layer already exists
88d4980a47f6: Layer already exists
56db180aad32: Layer already exists
711c9715952e: Layer already exists
f8cad89c2502: Layer already exists
381d6d079e1d: Layer already exists
8a4c2b7f231f: Layer already exists
3a2f92b02f7b: Layer already exists
04bd31396a7a: Layer already exists
034332202128: Layer already exists
f2cb0ecef392: Layer already exists
v0.0.2: digest: sha256:c82f1c64bbdd86fdeba44de5393f0af6e9271ac9cbad8a626c320e61b29dbe64 size: 3039
```
Note the message `Layer already exists`. Because the repository we pushed to
already has an image (`dockerhub/simple-docker-app:latest`), Docker noted that
our latest push used several of the same layers for its image. Because of this,
it didn't need to push them separately to the registry. This is another good
example of how the use of layers saves space.

We've created new tags for our images here to push them to Docker Hub, but

> usually you'll build an image with the user (owner name) directly so that

Reviewer 2: Typo `docker build`

Author: Done.

tagging doesn't have to take place before pushing, for example:
```
$ docker built -t dockerhub/simple-docker-app:latest .
```
If you again look at the profile for your user account and select the
`dockerhub/simple-docker-app` repository, this will take you to a page for that
specific repository (you can manage your repository here using
'Manage Repository'). If you select the 'Tags' panel, you'll see that there are
now two versions of the image stored in the registry, `latest` and `v0.0.2`.
This will also show you the compressed size of the images stored on Docker Hub,
as well as a copy and paste line that will allow you to pull the image
(for example `docker pull dockerhub/simple-docker-app:latest`).

`docker pull` is the command used to pull images from a Docker registry,

> allowing any image that has been stored in an accessible registry to be pulled

Reviewer 2: in a remote registry?

Author: Added 'remote` to be explicit.
